---
layout: post
header-img: img/default-blog-pic.jpg
---

# Extracts from Rapid Software Testing Workshop

This was the first time I attended any workshop on testing techniques and to my wonder it could have nothing be greater when the presenter is the testing Guru Michael Bolton. I was following Michael since 2 years when I came to know about “Exploratory Testing” & then “Rapid Software” testing techniques. For those who don’t know Michael, he has over 15 years of experience in the computer industry testing, developing, managing, and writing about software. He is the founder of DevelopSense, a Toronto-based consultancy established in 1998 to provide services in program management, testing, configuration management, and professional and personal coaching. Michael has delivered workshops, tutorials, and conference presentations on Rapid Software Testing and other aspects of testing methodology to nearly every part of the world.

It was a two day workshop on Rapid Software Testing. The training was starting at 9:00 am and till 8:30 am I was confused about the location. The organizers showed their generosity by attaching the google map of the training location in the entry letter, but to my surprise the address on letter and on the google map were 30 kms apart. Here comes the first lesson of the testing which even Michael emphasized that requirements can be confusing. So I called the organizers and confirmed the location. Fortunately it was just walking distance away. The group which came there to attend the training consisted of testers, leads, managers, senior managers, directors, development managers and independent consultants. As per Michael, it was the best group he has trained in India as it was a good mix of people from different domains which provided a great platform for discussion about different challenges being faced in testing.

**About the Course**

This exclusive 2-day workshop was an introduction to the skill of Rapid Software Testing (RST) – the way to test any software, anytime, under any type of circumstances, to make sure that your work delivers under the toughest kind of investigation. This course was developed by James Bach, Michael Bolton, and Cem Kaner, with substantial contributions by other members of the Context-Driven School of software testing. The rapid approach is much more than testing with sense of speed or urgency. It is a result oriented testing which eliminates redundant tasks, make sure that the critical questions are asked and continually questions how testing can make the whole project execute in a smaller time frame. An important tool of rapid testing is called Exploratory testing. It amalgamates test design, test execution, test result interpretation, and learning into an integrated process which communicates important information about the product and thus aids in speedier recognition of an array of problems.

**Day 1**

Day 1 started with the definition of testing that “Testing is finding valuable information and giving it to the stakeholders”. The content was a good mix of theory & practical exercises. Michael told about various heuristic methods and oracles to constantly re-optimize testing to fit the needs of your clients. He focused that the mission or goals of testing should be clear, otherwise doing it rapidly would be pointless. He also explained various Heuristic Test Strategy models patterns for designing a test strategy and using oracles for determining whether an observed behavior of the product is or is not correct. Think of Heuristics as a guide or a set of rules and oracle as a principle by which we recognize problems. Michael also gave us a few demo exercises like The Calendar Problem & the famous Triangle Problem. The purpose of these exercises was to give us a starter on Rapid Testing. He emphasized that bugs or issues should be reported immediately as what we see from outside could be a tip of iceberg hiding huge problems. One should not just test on boundaries as sometimes boundaries can be dynamic. Just like in the calendar problem due to some badly written code,boundary testing was not providing enough coverage and it was through RST that we came to know about a bug which was exposing the whole fallacy in the code. Anything which makes you surprised, annoyed, frustrated, amused could be a bug or an issue. With this message and some discussions on how RST is a better way than other methods when being asked to test under same time constraints Michael ended the day one.

**Day 2**

On Day 2, Michael played the role of magician and told us that bugs are like magic. Magic fools people and bugs fool product. According to Michael,studying magic can help you develop the imagination to find better bugs. He gave various supporting statements like, learning to perform magic causes the magician to be aware of not only his own perspective, but also (and more importantly) others’ (here stakeholders) perception of the trick. When learning to perform magic tricks, you generally want to simplify things. Learning to perform magic and learning to figure out magic tricks require us to develop observational skills, and to recognize things that deceive us. Anyways, I feel the observational skills & the aptitude to test a product comes with experience & time. Michael then gave us an introduction to Exploratory testing, which is an important tool for rapid testing. There were some discussions on recording & reporting as well. The workshop ended with Michael’s note on role of a tester. He said that testing is a natural process; everybody in this world is born with a natural instinct of curiosity. This curiosity & observation takes the tester closer to the nature.

**Take Away from this Workshop:**

• This workshop definitely gave the exposure and a better insight to the testers working in Agile development methodology. • Meeting various big names from our Indian testing fraternity like Pradeep Soundararajan(well known test consultant), Rahul Mirakhur, Dr.Meeta Prakash (the only Indian Phd in Software Engineering), Ajay Balamurugadas and many others • Google group was created with a purpose to stay connected after the RST workshop with Michael Bolton and others • Everybody agreed to use Twitter as a fast mean of getting response. • Tell about the things you learnt from the course