---
layout: post
header-img: img/default-blog-pic.jpg
---

# Customer: "Although I asked for it..... that's not what I desired!!"

If you feel the statement above(in any grammatical form) was your plight during your past waterfall projects, then its time you switched your project methodology from waterfall to Agile!!  Lets break the above statement into two halves, _waterfallishly_\- **"Although I asked for it"** What does this fragment imply? Probably that you got what you had asked for. Thereby meaning that the project was in accordance with your acceptance signoff, thereby meaning that the project functionality was in accordance to the FRD(functional requirement document). Thereby meaning that the business analyst's effort was justified. Let us also assume that the project source code strictly adhered to the TDD(technical design document), and that the project passed all the testing phases( except UAT... that's when you shout usually). What good does the above mentioned effort do to the project if your stance signifies the second half of the title :- **".... thats not what I desired!!"** this statement rather drains down all the above mentioned effort. Lets draft the irony in the scenario- '_You come up with a project, sign the contract after validating all the prerequisite waterfallish documents, the end product developed is inline with your sign off, still you shout 'That's not what I had asked for!!_' Ought to mention that such scenarios are very common in waterfallish projects. The reason for that is not that you were hash driven during the signoff, but rather something very vernacular. When you start off a project, you just have in mind a gist of what you want. And in most waterfallish cases, what you get is just a minimal percentage of the real expectation or the real goal. I ascribe the cause for the above problem to the fact that initially your vision is hazy. Following traditional waterfallish process, the project undertakers try to extract as much details as possible at this point of time. Be it you get the best business analysts and the best technical team, the final photograph clicked in a hazy environment will always be hazy. While building the functional requirement documents and the technical design documents, the end product is drafted based on some static wire frames which are indeed based on your hazy thoughts. So what you get is just a part of the portion that you were able to feed from those naive thoughts.  Ought to mention that business analysts do try to edit/polish the photograph, make as many cosmetic changes as they can(using your make up kit) to make the final picture better than the initial hazy picture clicked of your imagination, but is that sufficient? The answer is usually No. This is where I would like to cogitate the agile manifesto:- 

  * _Working software over comprehensive documentation _
  * _Individuals and interactions over processes and tools_
  * _Customer collaboration over contract negotiation_
  * _Responding to change over following a plan_
If you are shown a working prototype of your imaginative expectation, then it would be any day better than that comprehensive documentation. By documenting the exact expectation beforehand you are abstained from not circumscribing your high level thoughts to the documentation. When you have a working software in hand, you are free to play around with it as consumer of the software, propose the same to your stakeholders and expect much more meaningful feedback than what you get by just showing on paper how the real software would be. In fact in most cases, you are able to realize if a specific feature of the software really has the originally estimated business value. This way, you are getting more value for your money. _You don't just buy a car by only looking at its news paper advertisement, do you? You first go and test drive the car. _And for those buying a car without test driving it, often end up dissatisfied(did I just bespeak waterfall). Rather than just abiding by the development phase processes, you build the product iteratively. At the end of each iteration, by having a working software your expectation is always inline with the your imagination(if it is not, then you shout at the end of the iteration, rather further later). I don't need to mention how valuable your early feedback is to the development team. Your expectation mature from iteration to iteration. It is like you are clicking the picture every iteration, so and so is the haze diminishing!! In waterfall, the later a bug is encountered, the more heavily it costs the team, indirectly to you. But the later you desire a feature in functionality, the more likely you receive an out of scope response. Then the negotiations(I call them quarrels) with the development manager are no new. Later, the development team res estimates the changes and you need to pay for it. The time schedule is just hampered there. Waterfall calls it _**'change control'**_. I believe there is nothing like change control. _Changes are not controlled, they are managed._ And by your regular feedback each iteration, the team manages the change in a much more lean way than what they do in the so called change control. And, the time and money that you spend should be lesser than what you spend due to change control. _This collaborative work is indeed more valuable than a contract negotiation!!_ P.S. Don't jump on to agile if you are sailing smoothly in waterfall, why disturb the calmness..... if so, may be you can try it if you feel you are sailing on petrol, rather than diesel (diesel is much cheaper in India, compared to petrol!!)

## Comments

**[Sunil Narsinghani](#5450 "2011-04-11 01:58:17"):** This is very much true and I have experienced this in past. I prefer the Agile way to safeguard the interest of the customer, as he will be my salesman (word of mouth). After a long time I came through a sensible article - Good job Karan.

**[Karan Nangru](#5478 "2011-04-17 15:39:43"):** Parallel conversation thread: http://linkd.in/fpOKhm

**[Serge Beaumont](#5480 "2011-04-18 11:59:06"):** Heh. Reminds me of a quote I heard from Guido Schoonheim: "When you're creating up-front documents in waterfall, all you are really doing is documenting your ignorance."

