---
layout: post
header-img: img/default-blog-pic.jpg
---

# User Centered Analysis Process

While working on my current project I came across some interesting concepts about User Centered Analysis and Design. The ultimate goal of any designer should always be a “actual user” friendly design. What is the use of a shiny and good looking e-commerce website when it does not have proper navigation to shop through. So a good design is just not about colors and shapes its actually about usability for the “actual users”. So the best way to design an interface is to go through a strategic analysis and design process to produce the most user friendly and good looking interfaces instead of just designing a colorful shiny website. Here I want to share few of my experiences and suggestions to implement this strategic process. These practices are applicable for any interface, starting from a banner to be kept at a conference hall till high end website. Here are stages for doing User-Centered Analysis (UCA) for the any software user interface:- 

  1. **Discovering.** _Who the end user are for user interface:_ It is very important to know Primary users for whom the interface must be a success. For instance, if your end-users are children, designing needs to be done according to their sensibilities, like use sans serif typeface, big and colorful font, chose colorful designs (e.g. pink colors for girls and blue for boys) which are more attractive.For youth/teenager design should have not much content, small fonts, they prefer shorter line lengths, and it should be smartly designed which attract them to use it and interact then only they will use it. For business people, the user interface should be simple but informative. Related information should be easily available as it takes just 3 seconds for a user to move to other site. For old people some of the usability points are similar to children e.g. use of sans serif font, big font size. However it shouldn’t be of too much colors. For people who have visual, motor, auditory and cognitive disabilities special guidelines need to be followed while designing User Interface.  _Mental model of the and their past experience._ Often people come-up with mental models which are based on their past experience. Mental models don’t always match with the reality however it sets the expectations, which drive and shape behavior. By constantly refining and revising this model drives requests for functionality. _Stakeholders goals and objectives:_ It helps to design features and functionality (usually phrased as specific metrics regarding sales, costs, name recognition etc ) which are  beneficial to the organization.
  2. **Collecting data on.**_ User profiles: _ Individual profiles describe related user groups who will be using the UI. Parameters of general user profiles are health, age, gender, education, language etc. _Work environment._ It helps to understand work environment of the users. Different work environment call for different designs. For instance for an application used track of working hours. People used to record time at the end of the week or month which would eventually result in inaccuracies. To avoid this PROBLEM, decision was to offer entry in multiple ways: web, desktop and palm application. Aspects of these three environmental profiles drive aspects of the corresponding designs? Connectivity? Screen size? Time in which to do the task? Availability of supporting information? _Field Studies:_ There are many ways to collect data. Direct – Obtaining data from actual users via direct contact (e.g. face to face) Indirect – Obtaining data from users without direct contact Individual – One person at a time Group – More than one person at a time for example group discussion Performance – The tasks are performed in the session for example user able to achieve the goal Discussion – The tasks are discussed, recalled, projected with options given After collecting data collate and find similarities and variations in responses across different user groups like tasks, frequency of use, time etc. Document things that are necessary using stories, flow diagrams, images, tables and graphs. _Scenarios of how user’s will use the interface:_ Scenarios provide the “how-to” perspective It helps to perspective. It help to understand what all task need to do, discovers relationships among tasks, understand how multiple tasks occur together in the real world.
All these information help us in gaining more inputs for brainstorming and developing/enhancing a product which is a key to success for the product. User Centered Design mistakes later become maintenance problems and have additional hidden cost in terms of training each individual help desk person. User Centered Design obviously leads towards less hidden or training cost. Initially the freedom to design is high and in turn less cost of change. By getting smart early helps in incorporating good ideas before the site is frozen, User Centered Analysis (UCA) reduces rework and maintenance is greatly reduced. 

<!--[if gte mso 9