---
layout: post
header-img: img/default-blog-pic.jpg
---

# Create, Update and Delete Jobs Dynamically in Quartz

**Problem** I was recently working on a poc(proof of concept). The requirements were, to be able to dynamically schedule jobs using Qaurtz. After looking examples on the web I found most of the examples were of static scheduling (where we provide the jobs in a xml beforehand). But I can only find design strategies related to my requirements, no concrete implementation. So basically I will be providing a concrete implementation of the given problem in this blog.  **Design Strategy**

  * Create a simple web interface for creating, updating and deleting information related to Jobs([JobData](https://github.com/vijayrawatsan/QuartzDynamicScheduling/blob/master/src/main/java/in/xebia/domain/JobData.java)) in database.(I will not be showing this part)
  * Create a **PersistentJobSchedulerJob** which will schedule all the jobs stored in the database with a repeat interval. Basically the PersistentJobSchedulerJob is itself a job which will execute at regular intervals.
**The Code** Here is the link to the complete project [GituHub Repo](https://github.com/vijayrawatsan/QuartzDynamicScheduling) **Solution** Lets start with the **PersistentJobSchedulerJob.java** which is the most important class. [code language="java" highlight="13"] @Service public class PersistentJobSchedulerJob { private static Logger logger = Logger.getLogger("PersistentJobSchedulerJob"); @Autowired private JobRepository jobRepository; @Autowired private MailService mailService; @SuppressWarnings({ "rawtypes", "unchecked" }) @Scheduled(fixedRate=30000) public void schedulePersistentJobs(){ List<JobData> jobsData= jobRepository.findAll(); logger.info("Retriving Jobs from Database and Scheduling One by One | Total Number of Jobs: "+jobsData.size()); try{ Scheduler scheduler = new StdSchedulerFactory().getScheduler(); scheduler.start(); for(JobData jobData: jobsData){ JobDetail job = newJob(MailSenderJob.class) .withIdentity(jobData.getJobName()) .usingJobData(getJobDataMap(jobData)) .build(); if(!jobData.getActive()){ logger.info("Deleting a Job"); scheduler.deleteJob(new JobKey(jobData.getJobName())); continue; } if(scheduler.checkExists(new JobKey(jobData.getJobName()))){ logger.info("Rescheduling the Job"); Trigger oldTrigger = scheduler.getTrigger(new TriggerKey(jobData.getJobName()+"Trigger")); TriggerBuilder tb = oldTrigger.getTriggerBuilder(); Trigger newTrigger = tb.withSchedule(simpleSchedule() .withIntervalInMilliseconds(jobData.getRepeatInterval()). repeatForever()) .build(); scheduler.rescheduleJob(oldTrigger.getKey(), newTrigger); }else{ logger.info("Scheduling the Job"); scheduler.scheduleJob(job,getTrigger(jobData)); } } }catch (SchedulerException e) { logger.error("Scheduler Exception : "+e.getMessage()); } } private JobDataMap getJobDataMap(JobData jobData) { JobDataMap jobDataMap = new JobDataMap(); jobDataMap.put("recipients", jobData.getRecipients()); jobDataMap.put("mailService", mailService); return jobDataMap; } private Trigger getTrigger(JobData jobData){ SimpleTrigger simpleTrigger = newTrigger().withIdentity(jobData.getJobName()+"Trigger") .startAt(jobData.getStartDateTime()) .withSchedule(simpleSchedule() .withIntervalInMilliseconds(jobData.getRepeatInterval()). repeatForever()) .build(); return simpleTrigger; } } [/code] The above job is triggered using Spring's TaskScheduling framework([applicationContext.xml](https://github.com/vijayrawatsan/QuartzDynamicScheduling/blob/master/src/main/resources/applicationContext.xml)). You can see in **line 13** I'm providing the interval in which job should be repeated. From lines **15 through 43** I'm first reading all the jobs data from database. Then for each job's data a Quartz Job is created with a corresponding trigger. Now there are three cases, 

  * If the job is not active(that means its deleted, so when you design your CRUD application make sure for a delete operation you just turn the field active to false, do not delete the row) , check if it exists in scheduler delete it. Move to the next job.
  * If job is active, check if it exists and if it does, simply update the trigger and reschedule the job.
  * If job is active, check if it exists and if it does not, simply schedule the job.
Lets see the code for **MailSenderJob.java** [code language="java"] public class MailSenderJob implements Job { private static Logger logger = Logger.getLogger("MailSenderJob"); @SuppressWarnings("rawtypes") public void execute(JobExecutionContext context) throws JobExecutionException { logger.info("In MailSenderJob"); MailService mailService = (MailService)context.getJobDetail().getJobDataMap().get("mailService");; Map dataMap = context.getJobDetail().getJobDataMap(); String recipients = (String) dataMap.get("recipients"); logger.info("Sending mails to : "+recipients); mailService.send(recipients); } } [/code] This is a pretty straight forward Quartz Job nothing new here. I am simply using the mailService and calling the send method. You can obviously run any logic you want. **Conclusion** In this blog we learned how we can dynamically create, update and delete jobs using Quartz Scheduler. Happy Reading.

## Comments

**[viswabe1](#9305 "2012-12-14 15:32:26"):** It's a great job.Thanks. Will u pls send me the complete project. My mail id is viswanathan@pointelsolutions.com

**[Vijay Rawat](#9306 "2012-12-17 19:24:49"):** Hi Viswanathan, I have shared the Github repo in the blog. https://github.com/vijayrawatsan/QuartzDynamicScheduling

