---
layout: post
header-img: img/default-blog-pic.jpg
---

# What's cool about SOAP UI??

I have been using SOAP UI tool for a while now and has been involved in one of the API testing projects where I used it . Believe me, this tool is very easy to use and this credit goes to the detailed documentation on its site and tool's rich GUI. In Xebia, we have expertise working in SOAP UI and we have several projects running here for web service testing . Few months ago, I gave one hands on session on Soap UI with one of my colleagues here in Xebia where we showcased how SOAP UI works and introduced its out of the box features which I am going to pen down in this blog.There are two versions of SOAP UI tool where one is an open source and other is commercial one which is called SOAP UI PRO.  I have worked with both of  the versions and this is obvious that commercial version has more capabilities. I am not mentioning advantage of one version over other here. I will be talking about what makes this tool so popular in market? **Detailed Documentation and Support:-** You can download SOAP UI from its official website http://www.soapui.org/ which has provided detailed information about working of SOAP UI. One can easily start working with it by learning from its detailed documentation with suitable examples which is provided on its official website. **Recording:-** SOAP UI is also record tool as it offers advanced recording capabilities of all the data sent and received between web browser and a server. **Functional Testing:-** SOAP UI is a tool to do automation functional testing and regression testing of web services. In fact we can also perform non functional testing of web services other than only functional testing. Writing functional test cases, passing parameters from one test case/ test suite/ test step to other, reading parameter values, etc are easy and simple to do in SOAP UI. It can also handle testing of both SOAP and REST based type of services. **Non-Functional Testing:-** We can also do non functional testing like Security testing and Load testing with SOAP UI tool.These are available in both free and commercial versions of SOAP UI. Free version provides basic functionality whereas commercial version provides enhanced features. **Groovy and Java support:-** Apart from so many already build in features there is also support for scripting . We can write our scripts in Groovy and Java both. Since Groovy belongs to family of Java so people who are comfortable in Java can write java code. **Extend SOAP UI:-** We can add our custom libraries written either in java or groovy to extend SOAP UI. We can even build our jars and integrate them in SOAP UI. **Reporting and Coverage Analysis:-** Reporting is important part of project because  we always need report card which shows health of our project which also needs to be shared with customers. This tool can generate detailed as well as simple reports at Project, TestSuite, TestCase level with just one click but it depends on which version we are using. We can also get Coverage with the use of Coverage analyzer which is available in it with the hep of which we can extract coverage reports at project,test Suite and test case level **Support for different Environment**:- The concept of environment is quite amazing as they have released in their current version 4.5. Using environments, we can easily switch between different sets of SOAP and REST services, properties and database connections.It is normal practice that we follow in our projects to use different enviroments in our projects like development, QA, staging and then production. Every environment has its own database address, ip address and sometimes different type of test cases which depend on which environment we are using. This tool allows us to follow this practice effectively with its enviroment tab feature. **Command line build:-** We can run our test cases either functional or load using command line runner as it can be easliy integrated with hudson and maven. **Data Driven**:- With the use DataSource and DataSource loops test steps data driven testing has become cakewalk in SOAP UI. These test steps can let our test cases to read values from different sources from input like excel, csv ,database, spreadsheet, xml-files,etc. **Conclusion:-** I have not used any other tool for web service testing so I am not able to provide any comparison study in this blog. I have been able to achieve  everything whatever I wanted to do for my project. There is a lot support available on net where type any problem and you get answers. Inspite of the above mentioned features, it has got some other interesting features to offer like service mocking, JDBC connections, testing with different types of requests like JMS, AMF, SOAP, REST, etc.