---
layout: post
header-img: img/default-blog-pic.jpg
author: sherry.wasandi
description: 
post_id: 15483
created: 2012/12/18 12:47:53
created_gmt: 2012/12/18 07:47:53
comment_status: open
---

# AgileNCR 2013 - Colloquium for all-round Agility

<p align="JUSTIFY">In the spirit of showcasing the most salient developments in Agile today, <strong>Xebia</strong> proudly announces the <strong><a href="http://agilencr.xebia.in/" target="_blank">AgileNCR</a> </strong>2013 conference, scheduled to take place in <strong>February ‘13</strong>.</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">Initiated years ago with the guiding objective of lauding ingenuity, and spreading knowledge within the software community, <strong>AgileNCR</strong> has since become the most pioneering of Agile events in India. Renowned international speakers, industry patrons, agile gurus and several seasoned agilists; for instance,<span style="color: #696969;"><strong> Pete Deemer</strong></span>, <span style="color: #696969;"><strong>Sanjiv Augustine</strong></span>, <span style="color: #696969;"><strong>Serge Beaumont</strong></span>, <span style="color: #696969;"><strong>Hedwig Baars</strong></span> and <span style="color: #696969;"><strong>Rini van Soligen</strong></span>, have been associated with the conference time and time again.</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">Always endeavouring to acknowledge innovation in agility, this is the ideal platform for agile enthusiasts to share ideas, and for people and organizations that are seeking to explore and adapt to an agile work-culture and paradigm.</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY"><span style="color: #4b0082; font-size: small;"><strong>AGENDA</strong></span></p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">This time around, AgileNCR plans to bring forth an altogether fresh perspective towards holistic enterprise agility, with four sub-conferences spanning across the multifarious ethos and elements that encompass it. The first, <strong>Pragmatic Agile Adoption</strong>, will highlight a practical approach towards adoption of agile practices, the challenges posed, and the pivotal benefits reaped by overcoming them. This conference would comprise experience sharing sessions, case studies and white papers on Agile-Driven Process Efficiency, Team Agility, Scrum, Enterprise Agile Adoption, Distributed Development Best Practices, Agile Planning and Estimation, Agile Requirements Management, Agile Anti-Patterns and other related areas.</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">The second, would be the <strong>Executive Conclave</strong>, featuring the theme of making agility work for business, and how business leaders can effectively introduce agile in their respective business environments, for mitigating risk and delivering quality. <!--more-->This stream will expound upon Leadership in Agile Transformation, Agile Scaling, Agile Contracts, Building an Agile Organization, role of executive and middle management in Agile Adoption, and the measurement and forecast of business results.</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">Thirdly, there's the <strong>Tech Huddle</strong>, catering to the more technically inclined audience, with sessions elaborating upon the latest trends and tools that support agile deliveries, while demonstrating the merits of an agile approach to the same. It will include topics like Agile Engineering Best Practices, Maximizing Productivity as an Agile Developer, Agile Testing, Continuous Integration, Behavior-Driven Development (BDD), Test-Driven Development (TDD), Acceptance Test Driven Development (ATDD), OpenShift PaaS, etc.</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">Lastly, we present <strong>New Age HR</strong>. The Human Resources team has a crucial role to play in the success of Agile Teams. Hence, there is much to be said about what is to be expected while hiring a potential team member, what special skills agile teams require, and how to appraise an agile team members. Addressing this oft-neglected area of all-round agility, we finally have a conference in India which will cater exclusively to the HR aspect of Agility, and the nuances and challenges involved.</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY"><span style="font-size: small; color: #4b0082;"><strong>DATE </strong></span></p>

<p align="JUSTIFY"><strong>February 1 and 2, 2013</strong></p>

<p align="JUSTIFY"><span style="color: #4b0082;"><strong>VENUE</strong></span></p>

<p align="JUSTIFY"><strong>Radisson Blu Hotel </strong></p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">Plot No. 4,</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">Sector 13 - Next to Metro Station,</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">Dwarka City Centre,</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">Near IGI Airport</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">New Delhi -110075, India</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY">With the opportunity to meet and collaborate with some of the brightest, most conversant minds in the business, sessions presented by a highly esteemed panel of keynote speakers and a chance to witness the confluence of insights brought in by agile evangelists and enthusiasts alike in the offing, AgileNCR is THE place to be for a keen agilist. Excited? Well, so are we! Stay tuned for more details, and visit <a href="http://agilencr.xebia.in/" target="_blank">http://agilencr.xebia.in/</a> to register for the event, and receive latest updates.</p>

<p align="JUSTIFY"></p>