---
layout: post
header-img: img/default-blog-pic.jpg
author: Priyanka
description: 
post_id: 14815
created: 2012/07/30 16:51:39
created_gmt: 2012/07/30 11:51:39
comment_status: open
---

# Automation With Cubic Test

Cubic test is an automation tool that which can be used to capture automated test cases in form of graphics with its record and playback functionality. These test cases are captured in form of Data Flow Diagrams which are run by utilizing Selenium RC. Cubic test works with Eclipse only as it is available as plugin rather than a standalone exe which can be downloaded from following link:- <http://www.cubictest.org/update/> While using Selenium RC or web driver what I found out was that a user has to have technical knowledge of any of the scripting language which are supported by Selenium but this is not the case in Cubic test. It is not necessary for user to have knowledge of scripting language to use it. Even a manual tester is empowered to carry out Automated testing on an application using this tool. The test cases are fast to record and execute because this tool is graphical and uses its graphical user interface to represent any test case in a simple DFD (Data Flow Diagram). Cubic test**_ _**automation is based on page/states and the transitions taking place between them. There can be many elements on each page/state which are asserted by this tool. When a test case is recorded, Cubic test launches the browser of your choice in parallel with the application where a simple DFD (data Flow Diagram) is made as we record a test case. Elements can be verified when user right clicks and selects a particular action from the context menu. The DFD is made dynamically alongside the recording. It helps us to automate test cases in a graphical manner using its special module known as the _Graphical Test Editor_. Test cases can now be automated in parallel with the software development cycle. Changes to a test case can be made by adjusting the Modules present in the Graphical Test Editor. Adjustment of a few pointers can alter the flow of a test case according to our wish, This would save us the effort coding the entire script again.Elements on page can be identified using multiple identifiers like s.no, name, id, value etc. This gives us more reliable test case automation where the right elements are identified.Graphical test editor represents the test case in a DFD form which helps up to understand and implement the test case execution in a much faster and efficient way. The engineer doesn’t have to read and understand the entire script code from the beginning to the end in order to determine the functionality of a particular test case, Instead he can refer to the simple Data flow diagram. **SUMMARY:** The purpose of Cubic Test is to make it easier for an engineer to write their own Test cases. This is achieved by making the test definition an interactive and visual process. Tests recorded in Cubic Test are composed of States, which represent the states of the application. Each state can contain a number of Page elements, which represent the elements the web page should contain in the current state. To manipulate the state of the application, the user can create a User Interaction transition from one state to another, defining the actions that have to be performed in order to get to the next state.