---
layout: post
header-img: img/default-blog-pic.jpg
---

# Python – Programming made easy.

In my current project I got a chance to explore Python language and to build a testing framework using it. From very first day I was amazed to see the power and easiness to adopt this language. In this blog I am trying to showcase some feature of Python language that make it more practical and ahead of other programming language. _Python is a _

  * _Procedural language___
  * _Functional language___
  * _Object-Oriented language___
Python is a general-purpose programming language that provide you freedom to code in any way of programming style you are comfortable in or you can combine all the style in your code as application/solution demands. While studying Python I come across that there are roughly 1 million Python users out there at the moment which means there is a lot of potential in it. Following are the few reasons why programmers selected python:- **Software quality** For many, Python’s focus on readability, coherence, and software quality in general sets it apart from other tools in the scripting world. Python code is designed to be readable, and hence reusable and maintainable—much more so than traditional scripting languages. The uniformity of Python code makes it easy to understand, even if you did not write it. In addition, Python has deep support for more advanced software reuse mechanisms, such as object-oriented (OO) and function programming. ** ** **Developer productivity** Python boosts developer productivity many times beyond compiled or statically typed languages such as C, C++, and Java. Python code is typically one-third to one-fifth the size of equivalent C++ or Java code. That means there is less to type, less to debug, and less to maintain after the fact. **Program portability** Most Python programs run unchanged on all major computer platforms. Porting Python code between Linux and Windows, for example, is usually just a matter of copying a script’s code between machines. **Support libraries** Python comes with a large collection of prebuilt and portable functionality, known as the standard library. This library supports an array of application-level programming tasks, from text pattern matching to network scripting. In addition, Python can be extended with both homegrown libraries and a vast collection of third-party application support software. **Component integration** Python scripts can easily communicate with other parts of an application, using a variety of integration mechanisms. Such integrations allow Python to be used as a product customization and extension tool. Today, Python code can invoke C and C++ libraries, can be called from C and C++ programs, can integrate with Java and .NET components, can communicate over frameworks such as COM and Silverlight, can interface with devices over serial ports, and can interact over networks with interfaces like SOAP, XML-RPC, and CORBA. It is not a standalone tool. **Enjoyment****** Because of Python’s ease of use and built-in toolset, it can make the act of programming more pleasure than chore. Although this may be an intangible benefit, its effect on productivity is an important asset. **It’s Free** Python is completely free to use and distribute. As with other open source software, such as Tcl, Perl, Linux, and Apache, you can fetch the entire Python system’s source code for free on the Internet. There are no restrictions on copying it, embedding it in your systems, or shipping it with your products. In fact, you can even sell Python’s source code, if you are so inclined. Will publish code comparison with other languages in another To  know more about Xebia's offereing on Agile testing, click here (<http://www.xebia.in/application-testing.html>)